We remember from the previous course that there are
many types of user behaviors that are not tracked as
pageviews and that we have to track
as events as part of our implementation customization.
Just as pageview hits include a time stamp,
event hits also include a time stamp.
So, GA does have the same field to work with
in pageview hits and event hits for time calculations.
Let's consider an example of a time metric calculation with events.
Again, this is going to get a little bit complicated,
but the take-aways will be clear.
Let's say the user lands on page A.
After five minutes, that user views page B and we have time on page A five minutes,
session duration five minutes.
But let's say on page B,
after two minutes, the user starts a video.
At that point, we still don't have a time on page metric for
page B because we have not sent another pageview hit.
We've sent an event hit.
Calculation for session duration is based both on event and pageview hits,
but time on page takes only pageview hits into consideration.
After 16 minutes, a video 25 percent viewed event is sent to GA.
Session duration is now up to 23 minutes.
After another 16 minutes,
video 50 percent event viewed is sent to GA.
Session duration is now up to 39 minutes.
Let's say after another two minutes the user navigates to page
C. The session has been maintained because we have not
gone more than a half an hour without sending a hit to
GA. GA consider sessions based not only on pageview hits,
but on any hit that we send to it, including event hits.
At this point, GA will calculate
a 41 minutes session duration and page B will get a time on page of 36 minutes.
Once we go to page D,
we get a time on page for page C of
three minutes and session duration goes up to 44 minutes.
Average session duration is calculated much more accurately when we're sending events to
GA. Time on page is also calculated more accurately in that with events,
we can maintain better session continuity.
We also remember from a previous course that event tracking helps GA calculate
a more accurate bounce rate because if
a user lands on a landing page and then generates an event,
that session is not a bounce session because two hits had been sent to
GA indicating that the user was engaged enough to take an additional action.